@c This file is part of GNU Mailutils.
@c Copyright (C) 2001-2004, 2006-2007, 2009-2012 Free Software
@c Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c GNU Mailutils is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
@c modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
@c published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at
@c your option) any later version.
@c
@c GNU Mailutils is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
@c WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with GNU Mailutils.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

@c This file implements Fra@,{c}ois Pinard's concept of 'renditions'.

@c ======================================================================
@c This document has three levels of rendition: PUBLISH, DISTRIB or PROOF,
@c as decided by @set symbols. The PUBLISH rendition does not show
@c notes or marks asking for revision. Most users will prefer having more
@c information, even if this information is not fully revised for adequacy,
@c so DISTRIB is the default for distributions. The PROOF rendition
@c show all marks to the point of ugliness, but is nevertheless useful to
@c those working on the manual itself.
@c ======================================================================

@c Set this symbol if you wish FIXMEs to appear in footnotes, instead
@c of being inserted into the text.
@c @set PROOF_FOOTNOTED

@ifclear PUBLISH
@ifclear DISTRIB
@ifclear PROOF
@set DISTRIB
@end ifclear
@end ifclear
@end ifclear

@ifset PUBLISH
@set RENDITION The book, version
@end ifset

@ifset DISTRIB
@set RENDITION FTP release, version
@end ifset

@ifset PROOF
@set RENDITION Proof reading version
@end ifset

@macro WRITEME
@ifclear PUBLISH
@cartouche
@center @emph{@strong{Editor's note:} This node is to be written.}
@end cartouche
@end ifclear
@end macro

@c Output marks for nodes needing revision, but not in PUBLISH rendition.

@macro UNREVISED
@ifclear PUBLISH
@cartouche
@emph{Editor's note:} The information in this node may be obsolete or
otherwise inaccurate.  This message will disappear, once this node revised.
@end cartouche
@end ifclear
@end macro

@c Output various FIXME information only in PROOF rendition.

@macro FIXME{string}
@ifset PROOF
@sp 1
@cartouche
@strong{Editor's note:} \string\
@end cartouche
@end ifset
@w{}
@end macro

@macro deadlink{}
(@strong{Editor's note: dangling link})
@end macro

@macro FIXMEREF{text,string}
@ifset PROOF
@html
\text\ <span class="deadlink">\string\</span> 
@end html
@ifnothtml
\text\ @i{\string\}
@end ifnothtml
@deadlink{}
@end ifset
@w{}
@end macro

@macro FIXME-ref{string}
@FIXMEREF{,\string\}
@end macro

@macro FIXME-pxref{string}
@FIXMEREF{see,\string\}
@end macro

@macro FIXME-xref{string}
@FIXMEREF{See,\string\}
@end macro
