@example
@code{/* Prefix @emph{envelope_} is reserved */}
@code{#include <mailutils/envelope.h>}
@end example

@deftypefun int envelope_date (envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *);

Get the date that the message was delivered to the mailbox, in
something close to ANSI ctime() format: Mon Jul 05 13:08:27 1999.

@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int envelope_sender (envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *);

Get the address that this message was reportedly received from. This
would be the "mail from" argument if the message was delivered
or received via SMTP, for example.

@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int envelope_get_message (envelope_t, message_t *);
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int envelope_create (envelope_t *, void *);
Primarily for internal use.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void envelope_destroy (envelope_t *, void *);
Primarily for internal use.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int envelope_set_sender (envelope_t, int (*_sender) __P ((envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t*)), void *);

Primarily for internal use. The implementation of envelope_t depends
on the mailbox type, this allows the function which actually gets
the sender to be set by the creator of an envelope_t.

@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int envelope_set_date (envelope_t, int (*_date) __P ((envelope_t, char *, size_t, size_t *)), void *);

Primarily for internal use. The implementation of envelope_t depends
on the mailbox type, this allows the function which actually gets
the date to be set by the creator of an envelope_t.

@end deftypefun
