.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH POP3D 1 "November 10th, 2001"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
pop3d \- RFC1939 compliant POP3 Daemon. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pop3d
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B pop3d
command.
This man page is not intended to be complete.
Instead, it has documentation in the GNU Info format; see below.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
.SH OPTIONS
These programs follow the usual GNU command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the Info files.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version of program.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-daemon=MAXCHILDREN
Runs in daemon mode with a maximum of MAXCHILDREN child processes.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-inetd
Runs in inetd mode (default).
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-port=PORT
Specifies port to listen on, implies -d defaults to 110, which need not be specified.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-timeout=TIMEOUT
Sets idle timeout to TIMEOUT seconds TIMEOUT default is 600 (10 minutes).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR RFC1939.
.br
The programs are documented fully by
.IR "mailutils" ,
available via the Info system.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Jeff Bailey <jbailey@gnu.org>.
Copyright (C) 2001 Free Software Foundation.  This document is
in the PUBLIC DOMAIN.
